The updater language
====================

This document is about the language describing specific update
scenarios.

The language is, strictly speaking, ordinary Lua (currently the
supported version of Lua on OpenWRT is 5.1, but there should be very
little difference in what we use). Just the set of functions available
is limited to the functions listed here.

Security levels
---------------

There are different security levels of the scripts used.  The security
level may further limit the set of commands and the abilities of given
commands. This is to ensure the server may never send malicious
commands covertly (it still can send version of package that contains
the malicious code, but that's impossible to prevent with
an auto-updater, but it would at least have to notify about the
package being installed).

Security levels are:

Full::
  The Lua code is not run in any sandbox at all. All functions here
  work without any limits. Also, all Lua libraries are available
  without any limitation and further Lua code can be required
  (including compiled `.so` modules). This is what the internals of the
  updater would be built in.
Local::
  It is possible to reference local files and directories as further
  configuration scripts. It is possible to read UCI configuration and
  execute arbitrary shell commands.
Remote::
  The functions may reference only other remote resources, not local
  ones. Reading UCI config is not possible.
Restricted::
  It is possible to further restrict the entities referenced to a
  string match (eg. ensure that it comes from a given server). Access
  to flag storage is restricted only to flags belonging to the current
  script and scripts it references.

No function allows raising the security level when referencing another
script.

Each script runs with its own environment ‒ they don't see each
other's variables.

Order of execution
------------------

The scripts are executed in the order they are referenced, in DFS
order. A referenced script is first fully executed (with its
sub-scripts) before the current script continues. In that sense, it
works similar to any other scripting language `include` command.

However, the execution of the script does not include installation of
packages. That happens after all the scripts terminated. The scripts
simply describe in what situation the OS should be.

It is possible to hook some functions in between (after, before)
installation of packages, or even between installation and
configuration.
